# Computational Physics

## Assignment Week 9

last update: 28-04-2020

### Group Assignment

1. Let $f(x)=x+2/x$.

    (1) Use quadratic Lagrange interpolation based on the nodes $x_{0}=1$, $x_{1}=2$, and $x_{2}=2.5$ to approximate $f(1.5)$ and $f(1.2)$. 

    (2) Use cubic Lagrange interpolation based on the nodes $x_{0}=0.5$, $x_{1}=1$, $x_{2}=2$, and $x_{3}=2.5$ to approximate $f(1.5)$ and $f(1.2)$.

    (3) Compare the results of (1) and (2), and discuss on it.

2. Consider the function $f(x)=\sin x$ on the interval $[0,1]$. Determine the step size $h$ so that

    (1) linear Lagrange interpolation has an accuracy of $10^{-6}$ (i.e. find $h$ such that $\left\vert \Delta f_{1}\left(  x\right)  \right\vert
    <5\times10^{-7}$).

    (2) quadratic Lagrange interpolation has an accuracy of $10^{-6}$ (i.e. find $h$ such that $\left\vert \Delta f_{2}\left(  x\right)  \right\vert
    <5\times10^{-7}$).

    (3) cubic Lagrange interpolation has an accuracy of $10^{-6}$ (i.e. find $h$ such that $\left\vert \Delta f_{3}\left(  x\right)  \right\vert <5\times
    10^{-7}$).

3. Given the data in the following table, construct a divided differences table and interpolate at $x = 2.4$ and $x = 4.2$ using the fourth-degree Newton interpolating polynomial $p_4(x)$.
    | | | | | | |
    | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |  
    | $x_k$ | 1    | 2    | 3    | 4    | 6    |
    | $f_k$ | 0.69 | 1.10 | 1.39 | 1.61 | 1.95 |

4. Consider the data
5.  for $x = 0:20$ generated by the Bessel function of the first kind of order zero $J_0(x)$. Construct and plot the cubic splines, interpolate at $x = 3.4$, and compare with the actual value at that point.
   Hint: `scipy.special.jv` defines Bessel function of the first kind of real order and complex argument.  `scipy.special.spherical_jn` defines spherical Bessel function of the first kind or its derivative.

5. The following table gives the value of the integral
    $$
    I(\alpha)=\int_{0}^{\pi/2}\frac{d\phi}{\sqrt{1-\sin^{2}\alpha\sin^{2}\phi}}
    $$
    for various values of $\alpha$. (This integral is the complete elliptical integral of the first kind.)

    | | | | | | | |
    | --------------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | ------- | 
    | $\alpha$ ($^0$) | 0       | 5       | 10      | 15      | 20      | 25   |    
    | $I$    | 1.57080 | 1.57379 | 1.58284 | 1.59814 | 1.62003 | 1.64900 |

    (1) Using polynomial interpolation, find $I$ when $\alpha= 2^0$.

    (2) Use the trial-and-error search to find the value of $\alpha$ such that $I=1.58$.

6. The cross section measured for the resonant scattering of a neutron from a nucleus:

    | | | | | | | | | | |
    | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
    | $k$  | 1    | 2    | 3    | 4    | 5    | 6    | 7    | 8    | 9    |
    | $E_k$  (MeV) | 0    | 25   | 50   | 75   | 100  | 125  | 150  | 175  | 200  |
    | $f(E_k)$  (mb)  | 10.6 | 16.0 | 45.0 | 83.5 | 52.8 | 19.9 | 10.8 | 8.25 | 4.70 |
    | $\pm \sigma_k$ (mb)  | 9.34 | 17.9 | 41.5 | 85.5 | 51.5 | 21.5 | 10.8 | 6.29 | 4.14 |

    (1) The Breit-Wigner formula is given as
    $$
     f(E)=\frac{f_r}{(E-E_r)^2+\Gamma^2/4} 
    $$
    Try to fit the entire data with the Breit-Wigner formula. What is your interpretation of the parameters $f_r$, $E_r$ and $\Gamma$? Use your result to predict the cross section $f(E)$ when the neutron energy $E=10, 90, 185$MeV. 
    (2) Apply the cubic spline interpolation to predict the cross section $f(E)$ when the neutron energy $E=10, 90, 185$MeV. What kind of boundary condition you can choose for the computation? Compare the results of (1) and (2), and discuss on it.

7. The data in the following table shows the population of Canada recorded every 10 years between 1960 and 2010.
    (1) Find the rate of population growth in 2010 using the three-point backward difference formula,
    (2) Using the result of (1), and applying the two-point central difference formula, predict the population in Year 2020.

    | Year | Population (millions) |
    | ---- | --------------------- |
    | 1960 | 17.9                  |
    | 1970 | 21.3                  |
    | 1980 | 24.6                  |
    | 1990 | 27.8                  |
    | 2000 | 30.8                  |
    | 2010 | 34.1                  |

8. The partial derivative $f_x(x,y)$ of $f(x,y)$ with respect to $x$ is obtained by holding $y$ fixed and differentiating with respect to $x$. Similarly, $f_y(x,y)$ is found by holding $x$ fixed and differentiating with respect to $y$. The central-difference formula can be adapted to partial derivatives
    $$
    \begin{aligned}
    f_x(x,y)&=\frac{f(x+h,y)-f(x-h,y)}{2h}+O(h^2)\\
    f_y(x,y)&=\frac{f(x,y+h)-f(x,y-h)}{2h}+O(h^2)\end{aligned} 
    $$
    Let $f(x,y)=xy/(x+y)$. Calculate approximations to $f_x(2,3)$ and $f_y(2,3)$ with $h=0.1, 0.01$, and $0.001$. Compare with the values obtained by differentiating $f(x,y)$ partially.